Quantization docs (#911)
huggingface/text-generation-inference: docs/source/conceptual/quantization.md

# Quantization

TGI offers GPTQ and bits-and-bytes quantization to quantize large language models.

## Quantization with GPTQ

> GPTQ is a post-training quantization method to make the model smaller. It quantizes each weight by finding a compressed version of that weight, that will yield a minimum mean squared error like below 👇 

Reviewer: Yes, but IIUC the MSE is optimized per layer, and that's what I was trying to clarify, as quantizing a single "weight" sounded a bit strange to me. Perhaps "it quantizes each layer by finding a compressed set of weights that minimizes the mean squared error..."

What do you think?

> GPTQ is a post-training quantization method to make the model smaller. It quantizes each weight by finding a compressed version of that weight, that will yield a minimum mean squared error like below 👇 

Author: ah ok it's what you meant, I'll adjust taking this into account not to sound ambigous.

Given a layer \(l\) with weight matrix \(W_{l}\) and layer input \(X_{l}\), find quantized weight \(\hat{W}_{l}\):

$$({\hat{W}_{l}}^{*} = argmin_{\hat{W_{l}}} ||W_{l}X-\hat{W}_{l}X||^{2}_{2})$$

> TGI allows you to both run an already GPTQ quantized model (see available models [here](https://huggingface.co/models?search=gptq)) or quantize a model of your choice using quantization script by simply passing --quantize like below 👇 

Author: Sorry let me clarify.

```bash
docker run --gpus all --shm-size 1g -p 8080:80 -v $volume:/data ghcr.io/huggingface/text-generation-inference:latest --model-id $model --quantize gptq
```

> Note that TGI's GPTQ implementation is different than [AutoGPTQ](https://github.com/PanQiWei/AutoGPTQ). 

Author: What I meant was that TGI doesn't use AutoGPTQ under the hood.

> Note that TGI's GPTQ implementation is different than [AutoGPTQ](https://github.com/PanQiWei/AutoGPTQ). 

Reviewer: Ah ok. Maybe say that then? We could reassure readers that weights converted with AutoGPTQ (or through the 
Optimum integration) will be compatible for inference.

To run quantization only with a calibration dataset, simply run

```bash
text-generation-server quantize tiiuae/falcon-40b /data/falcon-40b-gptq
# Add --upload-to-model-id MYUSERNAME/falcon-40b to push the created model to the hub directly

> ```

Reviewer: Can we also use optimum to quantize (like here: https://huggingface.co/blog/gptq-integration#quantizing-models-with-the-optimum-library), and then just use the converted weights?

This will create a new directory with the quantized files which you can use with,

```bash

> text-generation-launcher --model-id /data/falcon-40b-gptq/ --sharded true --num-shard 2 --quantize gptq

Author: I clarified it.

```

You can learn more about the quantization options by running `text-generation-server quantize --help`.

If you wish to do more with GPTQ models (e.g. train an adapter on top), you can read about transformers GPTQ integration [here](https://huggingface.co/blog/gptq-integration).
You can learn more about GPTQ from the [paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2210.17323.pdf).

## Quantization with bitsandbytes

> bitsandbytes is a library used to apply 8-bit and 4-bit quantization to models. It can be used during training for mixed-precision training or before inference to make the model smaller. Unlike GPTQ quantization, bitsandbytes quantization doesn't require a calibration dataset or pre-quantized weights. One caveat of bitsandbytes 8-bit quantization is that the inference speed is slower compared to GPTQ or FP16 precision.

Author: Nicolas asked me to put a caveat.

> bitsandbytes is a library used to apply 8-bit and 4-bit quantization to models. It can be used during training for mixed-precision training or before inference to make the model smaller. Unlike GPTQ quantization, bitsandbytes quantization doesn't require a calibration dataset or pre-quantized weights. One caveat of bitsandbytes 8-bit quantization is that the inference speed is slower compared to GPTQ or FP16 precision.

Reviewer: The caveat is fine, because it allows users to understand the advantages and disadvantages of each method. What I meant is that mentioning bitsandbytes for training might be slightly confusing, as we are not using that feature here. We also just discussed that GPTQ requires some post-processing (which bitsandbytes doesn't), and readers may think that they _have_ to train using bitsandbytes in order to take advantage of it.

How about something like the following?

```suggestion
bitsandbytes is a library used to apply 8-bit and 4-bit quantization to models. Unlike GPTQ quantization, bitsandbytes doesn't require a calibration dataset or any post-processing – weights are automatically quantized on load. However, inference with bitsandbytes is slower than GPTQ or FP16 precision.
```

If you wish to do more with GPTQ models (e.g. train an adapter on top), you can read about transformers GPTQ integration [here](https://huggingface.co/blog/gptq-integration).
You can learn more about GPTQ from the [paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2210.17323.pdf).

## Quantization with bitsandbytes

bitsandbytes is a library used to apply 8-bit and 4-bit quantization to models. It can be used during training for mixed-precision training or before inference to make the model smaller.

> 8-bit quantization enables multi-billion parameter scale models to fit in smaller hardware without degrading performance. 8bit quantization works as follows 👇

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
8-bit quantization enables multi-billion parameter scale models to fit in smaller hardware without degrading performance too much. 8bit quantization works as follows 👇
```

Quantization ALWAYS degrades.

![](https://huggingface.co/blog/assets/96_hf_bitsandbytes_integration/quant-freeze.png)

In TGI, you can use 8-bit quantization by adding `--quantize bitsandbytes` like below 👇

```bash
docker run --gpus all --shm-size 1g -p 8080:80 -v $volume:/data ghcr.io/huggingface/text-generation-inference:latest --model-id $model --quantize --bitsandbytes-nf4

```

One caveat of bitsandbytes 8-bit quantization is that the inference speed is slower compared to GPTQ.

4-bit Float (FP4) and 4-bit NormalFloat (NF4) are two data types introduced to use with QLoRA technique, a parameter efficient fine-tuning technique. However, these data types can be used to make a pre-trained model smaller. TGI essentially uses these data types to quantize an already trained model before the inference.

In TGI, you can use 4-bit quantization by adding `--quantize bitsandbytes-nf4` or `--quantize bitsandbytes-fp4` like below 👇 

```bash
docker run --gpus all --shm-size 1g -p 8080:80 -v $volume:/data ghcr.io/huggingface/text-generation-inference:latest --model-id $model --quantize --bitsandbytes-nf4
```

> You can get more information about 8-bit quantization by reading this [blog post](https://huggingface.co/blog/hf-bitsandbytes-integration), and 4-bit quantization by reading [this blog post](https://huggingface.co/blog/4bit-transformers-bitsandbytes).

Reviewer 2: I really think this is not our job to explain how bnb works let's delegate that to their docs and be done with it.

Let's focus on showcasing the 3 usage and giving load and clear the PRO and cons.

PROs: doesn't require prequantized weights (as opposed to GTPQ).
CONS: runs slower that f16 or GPTQ
